Introduction: Alternatives for monitoring dental trauma in epidemiological surveys may be useful, as data collection of epidemiological investigation can be jeopardized due to several conditions. 
Aim: To investigate the validity of standard digital photographs to determine the occurrence of anterior dental trauma compared to the clinical examination in an epidemiological survey. 
Methods: Participants were children aged 8-12 years old attending both private and public schools; children were clinically evaluated for the assessment of dental trauma, and standard photographs were taken from maxillary and mandibular permanent incisors of each child. 
Validity was determined by calculating the percentages and respective 95% confidence interval of sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, and negative predictive value. 
Cohen's kappa statistic was also used. 
Results: A total of 412 children were included, totaling 3296 teeth assessed for dental trauma presence. 
The prevalence of dental trauma was 11.2% (95% CI 8.29-14.61) and 10.2% (95% CI 7.45-13.53), respectively, for the clinical examination and the photographic method. 
Agreement between the gold standard and the photographic diagnosis was good: 0.64 for the prevalence of dental trauma and 0.66 for diagnosis of dental trauma on a tooth basis. 
The diagnosis through the photographic method had higher specificity (96.7%) than sensitivity (65.2%). 
High positive likelihood ratio and low negative likelihood ratio were also observed. 
Conclusion: The photographic assessment method of dental trauma was valid and reliable as compared to the oral clinical examination.


Epidemiological studies related to anterior dental trauma have become more popular in the last years, and the prevalence of the outcome in children in these studies has presented a large variation from 2.4%  (1, 2)  to 58.6%  (3) . 
This wide difference in prevalence is attributed to characteristics of the populations where the studies were conducted and the diagnostic criteria of TDI (traumatic dental injuries) employed.


Several different indexes have been developed to diagnosis dental trauma in oral health surveys  (4, 5) . 
However, in several occasions, the data collection of epidemiological investigation can be jeopardized due to conditions related to the patient, examiner, and the clinical situation where the data were collected. 
Moreover, there are inherent difficulties in comparison with the examinations performed by different examiners in large or multicentric studies  (6, 7) , and there is a need of a considerable number of examiners for a large period of time (weeks or months) for these large epidemiological surveys  (8) . 
Therefore, there will be situations where the clinical examination would not be feasible (lack of professional, economic shortage) and alterna-tives for monitoring the oral health outcome will have to be employed.


One method that has raised the interest of epidemiologists in recent years is the photographic method  (9) . 
The main advantage to use intra-oral photographs in relation to the visual method is the possibility of storage of the image for further analysis, especially in longitudinal studies  (10) , as well allowing the comparison of data between different studies. 
This method has been demonstrated as a viable alternative for diagnosis of different conditions, including dental caries, dental restorations  (10) (11) (12) (13) , enamel opacities  (14, 15) , and fluorosis  (9, 16) .


In relation to the diagnosis of dental trauma using photographs, there is one study already using this method  (17) . 
However, there is no information available regarding the validity of photographic method and its reproducibility when compared to clinical diagnosis. 
When testing a method, two main basic patterns should be considered, the validity and reliability, which have also been called accuracy and precision  (18) . 
Reliability indicated whether the test provides the same results when repeated by the same or different examin-ers in different occasions. 
Accuracy refers to the degree the examination is appropriate to establish the value of what is being measured, observed, or interpreted. 
The validity informs whether the results represent the truth or how much is far from it  (18) .


Therefore, the aim of this study was to test the validity of the photographic method in relation to the clinical examination (gold standard) on the detection of anterior dental trauma.