Materials and methods The present study was conducted with a sample of children who had been involved in a multidisciplinary school-based cross-sectional study evaluating several general and oral health outcomes  (19) Training exercise To ensure study reliability, a training and calibration process was performed with the examiners responsible for conducting the oral examination prior to the fieldwork. 
Team members received a manual containing information regarding the instruments used. 
A mean Kappa value of 0.92 (range 0.89-0.95) was achieved for dental trauma assessment by the six examiners. 
For diagnosis of dental trauma through photographs, a training exercise was also conducted prior to the study. 
Training for photographic diagnosis entailed the use of color photographs (different photographs from those of the main study) to show the major clinical characteristics of each situation of interest and the criteria to be considered in the differential diagnosis. 
Clinical examination (gold standard) Children were clinically evaluated by six postgraduate dental students using protective equipment (gloves, mask, and apron) and artificial light, following procedures recommended by the World Health Organization (WHO), performed the clinical examination in regular school chairs  (20) Photographic method After the clinical examination, photographs were taken by two previously trained dentists for the use of photo-graphic equipment. 
Each child was positioned leaning against a wall contrary to the daylight, with the Frankfort maxillary plane parallel to the floor. 
A cheek retractor disinfected between children was inserted into the child's mouth and the child was asked to close the incisors in edge-to-edge contact. 
To obtain a reproducibility of the photographic conditions and minimize differences, a professional digital camera Nikon D40 (Nikon Co, Tokyo, Japan) with objective lenses Nikkor with zoom AF-S DX ED 18-55 mm f/3.5-5.6GII, set for 55 mm and using close-up lenses (+3), which were adapted in the anterior part of the objective lenses was used. 
A ring flash (Vivitar Macro 6000 AF C) was used to standardize the illumination condition. 
All photographs were taken with a fixed aperture of f/25 with fixed speed of 100, with autofocus selection. 
In relation to the quality and size of the images obtained, the modes FINE (high resolution) and LARGE were selected, where each photograph occupied 2.1 megabytes. 
All images were registered according to the specific patient and stored in a databank. 
To standardize the size of each image, the Adobe Acrobat Photoshop CS5 software package was used, keeping the resolution in 300 dpi and a marginal cut in 25 9 19 mm. 
No correction in relation to color, brightness, and contrast was performed. 
Figure  1 Three pediatric dentists who were not part of data collection in the field evaluate the photographs. 
The recorded images were projected by one of the authors, using Optima multimedia projector in a dark room, in the same hours for all examiners. 
The final photographic diagnosis was based on the classification agreement between at least two of the three dentists. 
Both for the clinical and photographic examination, dental trauma was diagnosed on a tooth basis. 
For the individual, dental trauma was considered 'present', when an injury was detected in at least one tooth, or 'absent'.